Variants over type parameters, out,
you will understand what variants
means by the end of this but
as before, we're gonna use
an example-based approach where
you can see right in front of
your eyes how something behaves.
We'll give it a name at the end.
And let's get started.
So, I have a situation where
I run a snack factory.
This is our example.
I make different kinds of snacks for now.
It's just cookies and pretzels.
So I have a snack base class,
a Boolean that indicates whether
something is pet friendly or not.
On all snacks it has that.
Pretzels are pet friendly based
on whether they're salted or not.
And then cookies, because these
happen to be chocolate cookies,
they're never pet friendly.
Dogs can't eat chocolate.
Maybe some pets can, but
we can't say it's pet friendly in general.
So, okay, the important thing to remember
here is a cookie is a subtype of snack.
All cookies are snacks.
Not all snacks are cookies.
Specifically, pretzels are not cookies.
So in my factory, I want to model
machines that produce cookies.
So I make an interface that kinda
describes this called producer.
Producer is generic over
the thing that it produces,
which is represented here by type T.
We can create a cookie producer.
Produce makes a new cookie.
Always dark chocolate it happens.
A snack producer while this
machine produces different
types of snacks,
I have here it does a coin flip.
And it could produce a milk
chocolate cookie if it's heads, or
it could produce a pretzel if it's tails.
I want you to imagine this as like, look,
producing a snack we don't necessarily
know what kind of snack is gonna come out,
we know it's going to be a snack.
So, Let's try assignment
in both directions.
If we need a snack producer,
we need something that
produces snacks of some sort.
Will it be okay if we
use the cookie machine?
Yep, I see some nods in class.
So yeah, cookies are snacks.
If I need a machine that makes snacks and
I have a cookie machine, that's fine.
But if I need something that only produces
cookies, will a snack producer do?
And the answer here is no.
Some pretzels are gonna
come out of that thing.
If I need specifically a cookie machine,
Those pretzels are kind of unwanted.
What we're observing here
is called covariance.
And I'm gonna read these
rows from left to right.
A cookie is a subtype of snack.
A cookie producer is
a subtype of snack producer.
The fact that both of these arrows
are pointing in the same direction.
That means that producer
is covariant over type T.
The type, this type is defined in such
a way that if we have like types A and
B, and A is a subtype of B,
producer A is a subtype of producer B.
The subtype directions are the same for
both the things that are filling
in the type param and
the producer that is using the type param.
TypeScript gives us
a way to describe this.
We can add a keyword before
the type param that is out.
It's easy to remember that the out
keyword pertains to producer
because the produce function
returns the type parameter.
The type parameter comes out of produce.
Let's look at a different situation.
I have a different machine now.
A packaging machine.
And I define a type to describe this.
This is a machine that takes some sort of,
collection of snacks,
and it puts them into boxes or bags or
whatever needs to happen in order for
us to be ready to ship them out.
We can make a cookie packager.
So we're passing in cookie
as a type param, and
we see that we're taking
cookie as an argument here.
And we can make a snack packager.
And if we look at this
the way this is implemented,
we could see that this machine it's
like a cookie packager plus plus.
It'll package cookies.
But if the item it's given is a pretzel,
it knows how to do that too, potentially
if there are other snacks in the future,
maybe it knows how to do that as well.
It's like imagine this is a cookie
packaging machine with like a pretzel
packaging attachment to it.
It can do everything a cookie
packager does and more.
Let's check for type equivalence.
Well, if we need a cookie packager,
yeah, the snack packager will do.
I mean it's packaging cookies
right up here on line 62.
But if we need something that
packages a wide range of snacks.
You can't just put a machine in
there that only handles the cookies.
You won't be handling the complete set of
possibilities of what a snack could be.
Let's bring that table back.
So, reading in the direction
of the arrows,
I would say a cookie
is a subtype of snack.
A snack packager is a subtype
of a cookie packager.
Meaning snack packages can stand in for
cookie packages, but
they're specialized,
they have extra stuff in them.
Similar to up here but
in the other direction.
We were saying like, look,
if you need a snack producing machine,
a cookie machine can spit out snacks,
that's no problem.
Cookies are snacks, you need me to
give you something that matches
the contract described
by the snack interface.
I'll chuck cookies at you all day,
it's fine.
So when these arrows are in
opposite directions,
we say that this type packager is
contrarian over its type parameter T.
For two types that you give it.
If a is a subtype of b, and then you look
at the packagers, they flipped directions.
A is a subtype of b.
But packager b is a subtype of packager a,
contravariance.
TypeScript gives us a way to
describe this using an n keyword.
It's kinda easy to remember this
one because the item goes in.
This will contravariant
behavior often happens when
you accept your type
parameter as an argument,
covariate behavior often happens when you
return your type parameter, in and out.
>> Do you find yourself using
the variance helpers very often?
>> These are so new that I really
haven't had a chance to use them much.
Where I have added them is a centrally,
like I have a repo that has JSON types.
Which if you took TypeScript fundamentals,
that's literally the contents of the repo,
and it's used by a lot of things.
I've added this to that because
it's a recursive type, and for
deeply nested JSON, you can end up running
through that recursion many, many times.
But I would strictly not recommend putting
this everywhere throughout your code.
It's just if you're trying to have
something that you're preserving
the covariant or
contravariant nature of it.
You could put this up as sort of
a guardrail where at least you know when
you've crossed into that territory.